This section corresponds to transaction [ITI-112] Resource Notify of the IHE Technical Framework. Transaction [ITI-112] Resource Notify is used by the Resource Notification Broker and Resource Notification Recipient.

### 3.112.1 Scope

The Resource Notify [ITI-112] transaction delivers a notification from the Resource Notification Broker to the Resource Notification Recipient about an event which matches an existing subscription.

The notifications from the Resource Notification Broker also include the Handshake Notification and the Heartbeat Notification in order to verify the recheability of the Resource Notification Recipient in the subscription activation process and during the existance of the subscription itself. Further, the Subscription Deactivation Notification can be send to inform of the deactivation of the Subscription.

### 3.112.2 Actors Roles

**Table: Actor Roles**

|Actor | Role |
|-------------------+--------------------------|
| [Resource Notification Broker](volume-1.html#broker)    | Sends the Notification Bundle Request to the Resource Notification Recipient |
| [Resource Notification Recipient](volume-1.html#recipient) | Receives the notification |
{: .grid}

### 3.112.3 Referenced Standards

**FHIR-R4** [HL7 FHIR Release 4.0.](https://www.hl7.org/FHIR/R4)

### 3.112.4 Interactions

<figure>
{%include ITI-112-Notification-seq.svg%}
<figcaption><b>Figure 2:3.112: ITI-112 interactions</b></figcaption>
</figure>
<br clear="all">


#### 3.112.5 Notification Bundle Request
This message uses the HTTP POST method on the target Resource Notification Recipient endpoint to submit the notification.

##### 3.112.5.1 Trigger Events
When an event occurs where the topics of the event match the filter requirements of one or more existing Subscriptions, the Resource Notification Broker will trigger this message to the corresponding Resource Notification Recipient.

In order to verify the recheability of the Resource Notification Recipient in the subscription activation process and during the existance of the subscription itself, the Resource Notification Broker will trigger this message to the corresponding Resource Notification Recipient.

When a Subscription deactivation occurs, performed by the Resource Notification Broker at the termination time or by the Resource Notification Subscriber with the [ITI-110] Resource Subscription transaction, the Resource Notification Broker should trigger this message to the corresponding Resource Notification Recipient, in order to inform that the Subscription is no longer active.

##### 3.112.5.2 Message Semantics

The Resource Notification Subscriber shall initiate an HTTP request according to requirements defined in the HL7® FHIR® standard for “[create](https://hl7.org/fhir/R4/http.html#create)” interaction. The message uses an HTTP POST method to submit a Bundle FHIR Resource as specify in [3.112.5.2.1 Bundle Resource](#3112521-bundle-resource).

The Resource Notification Subscriber actor shall submit the FHIR Bundle resource in either XML format or JSON format thus the media type of the HTTP body shall be either `application/fhir+json` or `application/fhir+xml` respectively.Th format shall match the MIME type on the `Subscription.channel.payload` element.

The Bundle is sent to the base URL as defined in FHIR. See [http://hl7.org/fhir/R4/http.html](https://hl7.org/fhir/R4/http.html) for the definition of “HTTP” access methods and “base”.

It is possible to use HTTP protocol or HTTPS protocol. The HTTPS protocol is highly recommended.

##### 3.112.5.2.1 Bundle Resource

The Bundle resource shall be compliant with [Bundle](https://hl7.org/fhir/R4/Bundle.html) and shall be compliant with[R4 Topic-Based Subscription Notification Bundle](https://build.fhir.org/ig/HL7/fhir-subscription-backport-ig/StructureDefinition-backport-subscription-notification.html).

The FHIR Bundle notifcation type shall have the following constrains:

- the `Bundle.type` element shall be `history`
- the first entry shall be a Element resource, compliant with [R4 Backport SubscriptionStatus Profile](http://hl7.org/fhir/uv/subscriptions-backport/STU1.1/StructureDefinition-backport-subscription-status-r4.html). This element is necessary to describe during notifications the state of the Subscription that has been triggered.

Note that since notifications use history type Bundles, all notifications need to comply with the requirements for that bundle type. Specifically, there are two invariants on Bundle (bdl-3 and bdl-4) that require a Bundle.entry.request element for every Bundle.entry. For that: 

- for the status resource (entry[0]), the request shall be filled out to match a request to the $status operation.
- for additional entries, the request should be filled out in a way that makes sense given the Subscription (e.g., a POST or PUT operation on the resource, matching the event happened to that resource that trigger the notification). However, a Resource Notification Broker may choose to simply include a GET to the relevant resource instead.

###### 3.112.5.2.1.1 Event Notification

The Bundle Resource sended by the Resource Notification Broker when an event occurs shall have:

- [Event Notification]()<!--link-->
    - the `Bundle.type` element valued `history`
    - in the first entry the [Notification Subscription Status Element]()<!--link--> resource;
    - zero or more additional entries, with either URLs or resources representing contents, depending on the `Subscription.payload.content` and the `notificationShape` defined in the Topic of the Subscription

When the payload content includes the resources, the notification shape shall be based on the definitions from the Topic of the Subscription:

- the resource that is the trigger for the Topic shall be included by the Resource Notification Broker
- any other resorce may be included by the Resource Notification Broker; in order to include resource that could be of interest for the Resource Notification Recipient, the Resource Notification Broker should follow what is define by the Topic of the Subscription for the notification shape. 

Note that Resource Notification Broker should attempt to provide the resources described in the topic, however Resource Notification Recipient shall expect that any resource beyond the focus resource are not guaranteed to be present.

###### 3.112.5.2.1.2 Handshake Notification

The Bundle Resource sended by the Resource Notification Broker in the subscription activation process shall have:

- [Handshake Notification]()<!--link-->
    - the `Bundle.type` element valued `history`;
    - in the first entry the [Handshake Subscription Status Element]()<!--link--> resource;
    - no other entry shall be present.

###### 3.112.5.2.1.3 Heartbeat Notification

The Bundle Resource sended by the Resource Notification Broker during the subscription period shall have:

- [Heartbeat Notification]()<!--link-->
    - the `Bundle.type` element valued `history`;
    - in the first the first entry the [Heartbeat Subscription Status Element]()<!--link--> resource;
    - no other entry shall be present.    
    
###### 3.112.5.2.1.4 Subscription Deactivation Notification

The Bundle Resource sended by the Resource Notification Broker after the deactivation of the Subscription, from performed by the Resource Notification Broker at the termination time or by the Resource Notification Subscriber shall have:

- [Subscription Deactivation Notification]()<!--link-->
    - the `Bundle.type` element valued `history`;
    - in the first the first entry the [Deactivation Subscription Status Element]()<!--link--> resource;
    - no other entry shall be present.


##### 3.112.5.3 Expected Actions

The Resource Notification Recipient processes the results according to application-defined rules.
The Resource Notification Recipient may handle errors if detected.

The Resource Notification Recipient may handle errors like missed notifications and broken connections by using the $event and $status operations on the transaction Resource Subscription Search [ITI-113] and following what is define in [Detecting Errors as a Subscriber](https://build.fhir.org/ig/HL7/fhir-subscription-backport-ig/errors.html#detecting-errors-as-a-subscriber), [Broken Communication](https://build.fhir.org/ig/HL7/fhir-subscription-backport-ig/errors.html#broken-communication) and [Recovering from Errors](https://build.fhir.org/ig/HL7/fhir-subscription-backport-ig/errors.html#recovering-from-errors) sections of the [Subscriptions R5 Backport](https://build.fhir.org/ig/HL7/fhir-subscription-backport-ig/index.html).

#### 3.112.6 Notification Bundle Response

The Resource Notification Recipient sends a Notification Bundle Response message to respond to a Notification Bundle Request message.

##### 3.112.6.1 Trigger Events

When the Resource Notification Recipient receives the notification sends this message to the Resource Notification Broker acknowledging the reception of the notification.

##### 3.112.6.2 Message Semantics

When the Resource Notification Recipient has processed the request, it shall return an HTTP response with an overall status code.

The Resource Notification Recipient returns an HTTP status code appropriate to the processing of the 
request. If the notification has been received and processed an overall http 200 response is used, if the reception or processing of the notification has failed an overall http 400 response is used.


##### 3.112.6.3 Expected Actions

The Resource Notification Broker may handle errors following what is defined in [Handling Errors as a Server](https://build.fhir.org/ig/HL7/fhir-subscription-backport-ig/errors.html#handling-errors-as-a-server) section of the [Subscriptions R5 Backport](https://build.fhir.org/ig/HL7/fhir-subscription-backport-ig/index.html).


### 3.112.6.4 CapabilityStatement Resource

The Server implementing this transaction shall provide a CapabilityStatement Resource as described in ITI TF-2x: Appendix Z.3 indicating the transaction has been implemented. 
* Requirements CapabilityStatement for [Client](CapabilityStatement-IHE.ToDo.client.html)
* Requirements CapabilityStatement for [Server](CapabilityStatement-IHE.ToDo.server.html)

### 3.112.6.5 Security Considerations

See [DSUBm Security Considerations](volume-1.html#security-considerations). 

The Resource Notification Broker should confirm that the Resource Notification Recipient is still authorized to receive the information that it is searching for. To assess if a Resource Notification Recipient is still  authorized to receive the information the Resource Notification Broker may utilize additional policy defined between the actors in order to prevent the sending of notifications in particular cases. If an authorization token is used to verify the autorization of a Recipient to receive notification the Resource Notification Broker shall also verify that this tokens has not been revoked before sending the Notification Bundle Request message. 

It's highly recommended that the Resource Notification Broker should use some form of authentication method when sending a notification Message and the Resource Notification Recipient should always verify the authentication token used in this transaction. 

The Resource Notification Recipient should also be defensive and robust to a malicious client that may send a large volume of fake notifications with empty notifications, which would cause the Resource Notification Recipient to send many (potentially expensive) queries to a server.


#### 3.112.6.6 Security Audit Considerations

The Resource Notification Broker, when grouped with [ATNA](https://profiles.ihe.net/ITI/TF/Volume1/ch-9.html) Secure Node or Secure Application Actor, shall be able to record a [Notify Broker Audit Event Log](StructureDefinition-IHE.DSUBm.Notify.Audit.Broker.html).  !!! TO DO ARTIFACT !!!!

The Resource Notification Recipient, when grouped with [ATNA](https://profiles.ihe.net/ITI/TF/Volume1/ch-9.html) Secure Node or Secure Application Actor, shall be able to record a [Notify Recipient Audit Event Log](StructureDefinition-IHE.DSUBm.Notify.Audit.Recipient.html).  !!! TO DO ARTIFACT !!!!

The Resource Notification Broker and Resource Notification Recipient may also record fundamental AuditEvents for each individual resource Created or Updated, using the [BALP](https://profiles.ihe.net/ITI/BALP/index.html) [basic profile for REST events](https://profiles.ihe.net/ITI/BALP/content.html#3573-restful-activities).
